# Part 5: Hello Config

This section will explore how to configure Nextflow pipelines using configuration files, profiles, process directives, and executors.
Configuration management is an essential aspect of Nextflow pipeline development, allowing you to customize the behavior of your pipeline, adapt it to different environments, and optimize resource usage.
By understanding and effectively utilizing these configuration options, you can enhance the flexibility, scalability, and performance of your pipelines.

## 1. Check and modify configuration

### 1.1. Run nf-hello-gatk with default settings

```bash
nextflow run seqeralabs/nf-hello-gatk
```

When you run the pipeline with the default settings using the command above, the following happens:

1. Nextflow downloads the pipeline from the GitHub repository `seqeralabs/nf-hello-gatk`.
1. It then executes the pipeline using the default configuration.
1. The pipeline will likely use Docker containers to run the required tools (Samtools and GATK).
1. It processes the input BAM files, creates index files, and performs variant calling.
1. The results are generated by default in the `results` directory.
1. Nextflow also creates a `work` directory containing intermediate files and logs.
1. Upon completion, Nextflow displays a run summary, including any errors or warnings.

Now, let's see how this was configured and set up.

### 1.2. Check configuration

Open the `nextflow.config` file and inspect the contents:

```bash
code nextflow.config
```

The contents should look like this:

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
docker.enabled = true
```

This config block tells the pipeline to use Docker containers to run the required tools.

### 1.3. Modify configuration

Let's modify the configuration to use Conda instead of Docker and explicitly disable Docker.

_Before:_

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
docker.enabled = true
```

_After:_

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
docker.enabled = false
conda.enabled = true
```

Now let's run the pipeline again with the modified configuration:

```bash
nextflow run seqeralabs/nf-hello-gatk
```

This time, the pipeline will use Conda environments to run the required tools.

## 2. Profiles

Profiles are a way to customize the behavior of Nextflow pipelines by selection, rather than setting them permanently.

### 2.1. Create a profile

_Before:_

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
docker.enabled = false
conda.enabled = true
```

_After:_

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
profiles {
    'docker' {
        docker.enabled = true
    }
    'conda' {
        conda.enabled = true
    }
}
```

### 2.2. Run the pipeline with a profile

```bash
nextflow run seqeralabs/nf-hello-gatk -profile docker
```

or

```bash
nextflow run seqeralabs/nf-hello-gatk -profile conda
```

As demonstrated above, by creating and using profiles, we've enhanced our pipeline's flexibility and ease of use. 
We can now run our pipeline with Docker or Conda using a single command line argument by specifying the appropriate profile (`-profile docker` or `-profile conda`).
This method of configuration management improves the portability and maintainability of our Nextflow pipeline, enabling us to accommodate various execution scenarios easily.

## 3. Process directives and resources

### 3.1. Process directives

In a previous training module, we used process directives to modify the behavior of a process when we added the `publishDir` directive to export files from the working directory. 
Let's look into directives in more detail.

### 3.1.1 Set process resources

By default, Nextflow will use a single CPU and 2GB of memory for each process. 
We can modify this behavior by setting the `cpu` and `memory` directives in the `process` block. 
Add the following to the end of your `nextflow.config` file:

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="11"
process {
    cpus = 8
    memory = 4GB
}
```

Run the pipeline again with the modified configuration:

```bash
nextflow run seqeralabs/nf-hello-gatk -profile docker
```

You shouldn't see any difference; however, you might notice that the three processes get bottlenecked behind each other. 
This is because Nextflow will ensure we aren't using more CPUs than are available.

### 3.1.2 Modify process resources for a specific process

We can also modify the resources for a specific process using the `withName` directive. 
Add the following to the end of your `nextflow.config` file:

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="11"
process {
    withName: 'GATK_HAPLOTYPECALLER' {
        cpus = 8
        memory = 4.GB
    }
}
```

Run the pipeline again with the modified configuration:

```bash
nextflow run seqeralabs/nf-hello-gatk -profile docker
```

Now, the settings are only applied to the GATK HaplotypeCaller process.
This is useful when your processes have different resource requirements so you can right-size your resources for each process.

## 4. Executor

### 4.1. Local executor

Until now, we have been running our pipeline with the local executor.
This runs each step on the same machine that Nextflow is running on. 
However, for large genomics pipelines, you will want to use a distributed executor. 
Nextflow supports several different distributed executors, including:

-   HPC (SLURM, PBS, SGE)
-   AWS Batch
-   Google Batch
-   Azure Batch
-   Kubernetes

We can modify the executor used by nextflow using the `executor` process directive. Because `local` is the default executor, the following configuration is implied:

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="18"
process {
    executor = 'local'
}
```

### 4.2. Other executors

!!! note

    This is a demonstration and designed to go wrong!

If we wish to change executor, we could simply set this to one of the values in the documentation:

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="18"
process {
    executor = 'slurm'
}
```

However, if we add this to our config and run the pipeline we will that includes this error:

```console
Cannot run program "sbatch"
```

Nextflow has interpreted that we wish to submit to a Slurm cluster, which requires the use of the command `sbatch`. 
However, because our Gitpod instance doesn't have slurm installed (and isn't connected to a cluster)  this throws an error.

If we check inside the `.command.run` file created in the work directory, we can see that Nextflow has created a script to submit the job to Slurm.
!!! note
	
	The output of your nextflow console will have the hash of the work subdirectory, which will differ from the paths shown below.
```bash title=".command.run" linenums="1"
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH -J nf-SAMTOOLS_INDEX_(1)
#SBATCH -o /home/gitpod/work/34/850fe31af0eb62a0eb1643ed77b84f/.command.log
#SBATCH --no-requeue
#SBATCH --signal B:USR2@30
NXF_CHDIR=/home/gitpod/work/34/850fe31af0eb62a0eb1643ed77b84f
### ---
### name: 'SAMTOOLS_INDEX (1)'
### container: 'community.wave.seqera.io/library/samtools:1.20--b5dfbd93de237464'
### outputs:
### - 'reads_father.bam'
### - 'reads_father.bam.bai'
### ...
```

If our process had more directives, such as `clusterOptions`, `cpus`, `memory`, `queue`, and `time`, these would also be included in the `.command.run` file and directly passed to the Slurm execution. 
They would also be translated to the equivalent options for other executors. 
This is how Nextflow creates the commands required to correctly submit a job to the sbatch cluster via a single configuration change.

### 4.3. Using Executors in Profiles

Let's combine `profiles` with `executors`. Add the following to your configuration file:

before:

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
profiles {
    'docker' {
        docker.enabled = true
        conda.enabled = false
    }
    'conda' {
        docker.enabled = false
        conda.enabled = true
    }
}
```

After:

```groovy title="nextflow.config"
profiles {
    'docker' {
        docker.enabled = true
        conda.enabled = false
    }
    'conda' {
        docker.enabled = false
        conda.enabled = true
    }
    'local' {
        process.executor = 'local'
    }
    'slurm' {
        process.executor = 'slurm'
    }
}
```

Now run the pipeline using two profiles, `docker` and `local`:

```bash
nextflow run seqeralabs/nf-hello-gatk -profile docker,local
```

We have returned to the original configuration of using Docker containers with local execution. 
However, now we can use profiles to switch to a different software packaging system (conda) or a different executor (slurm) with a single command-line option.
