---
title: Hello Nextflow
hide:
  - toc
---

# Hello Nextflow

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

-   :material-book-open-variant:{ .lg .middle } __Course summary__

    ---

    **Hello Nextflow is a hands-on introduction to building reproducible and scalable data analysis workflows.**

    Working through practical examples and guided exercises, you will learn the fundamentals of Nextflow, including how to define processes, connect them into pipelines, manage files and software dependencies, parallelize execution effortlessly, and run workflows across different computing environments.

    You will take away the skills and confidence to start developing and running your own workflows with Nextflow.

-   :material-information-outline:{ .lg .middle } __Additional information__

    ---

    ??? terminal "Technical requirements"

        You will need a GitHub account OR a local installation of Nextflow. See [Environment options](../envsetup/index.md) for more details.

    ??? learning "Learning objectives"

        - Describe and utilize core Nextflow components sufficient to build a simple multi-step workflow
        - Describe next-step concepts such as operators and channel factories
        - Launch a Nextflow workflow locally
        - Find and interpret outputs (results) and log files generated by Nextflow
        - Troubleshoot basic issues

    ??? people "Audience & prerequisites"

        - **Audience:** This course is designed for learners who are completely new to Nextflow.
        - **Skills:** Some familiarity with the command line, basic scripting concepts and common file formats is assumed.
        - **Domain:** The exercises are all domain-agnostic, so no prior scientific knowledge is required.

    ??? videos "Course videos"

        Videos are available for each chapter, featuring an instructor working through the exercises. The video for each part of the course is embedded at the top of the corresponding page.

        You can also find the [entire playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLPZ8WHdZGxmXiHf8B26oB_fTfoKQdhlik) on the Nextflow YouTube channel.

</div>

## Course overview

The entire course is designed to be hands-on, with goal-oriented exercises structured to introduce information gradually.

You will develop a simple Nextflow pipeline that takes some text inputs, runs a few transformation steps, and outputs a single text file containing an ASCII picture of a character saying the transformed text.

### Lesson plan

In order to avoid overwhelming you with concepts and code, we've broken this down into six parts that will each focus on specific aspects of Nextflow.

| Course chapter                 | Summary             | Estimated duration  |
| -------------------------------| ------------------- | ------------------- |
| [Part 1: Hello World](./01_hello_world.md)           | Basic components and principles involved in assembling and running a Nextflow workflow             | 30 mins             |
| [Part 2: Hello Channels](./02_hello_channels.md)     | Using channels and operators for processing inputs and parallelizing execution effortlessly        | 45 mins             |
| [Part 3: Hello Workflow](./03_hello_workflow.md)     | Using channels to chain multiple steps together and handle transfer of data between steps     | 60 mins             |
| [Part 4: Hello Modules](./04_hello_modules.md)       | Applying code modularity principles to increase reusability and decrease maintenance burden   | 20 mins             |
| [Part 5: Hello Containers](./05_hello_containers.md) | Using containers as a mechanism for managing software dependencies and increase reproducibility     | 60 mins             |
| [Part 6: Hello Config](./06_hello_config.md)         | Customizing pipeline behavior and optimizing usage in different computational environments usage    | 60 mins             |

By the end of this course, you will be well-prepared for tackling the next steps in your journey to develop and apply reproducible workflows for your scientific computing needs.

Ready to take the course?

[Get started :material-arrow-right:](00_orientation.md){ .md-button .md-button--primary }

<!-- Clearfix for float -->
<div style="content: ''; clear: both; display: table;"></div>
