# Course summary

Congratulations on completing the Hello Nextflow training course! 🎉

<div class="video-wrapper">
  <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xHOcx_4Ancg?si=Lp8hS8RdaMwbp5j5&amp;list=PLPZ8WHdZGxmXiHf8B26oB_fTfoKQdhlik" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

/// caption
:fontawesome-brands-youtube:{ .youtube } See the [whole playlist on the Nextflow YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLPZ8WHdZGxmXiHf8B26oB_fTfoKQdhlik).

:green_book: You can read the [video transcript](./transcripts/07_next_steps.md) alongside the video.
///

## Your journey

You started with a very basic workflow that ran a hardcoded command.
Over the course of six parts, you transformed that basic workflow into a modular multi-step pipeline that exercises key features of Nextflow including channels, operators, built-in support for containers, and configuration options.

### What you built

- The final form of the Hello workflow takes as input a CSV file containing text greetings.
- The four steps are implemented as Nextflow processes (`sayHello`, `convertToUpper`, `collectGreetings`, and `cowpy`) stored in separate module files.
- The results are published to a directory called `results/`.
- The final output of the pipeline is a plain text file containing ASCII art of a character saying the uppercased greetings.

<figure class="excalidraw">
--8<-- "docs/hello_nextflow/img/hello_pipeline_complete.svg"
</figure>

1. **`sayHello`:** Writes each greeting to its own output file (_e.g._ "Hello-output.txt")
2. **`convertToUpper`:** Converts each greeting to uppercase (_e.g._ "HELLO")
3. **`collectGreetings`:** Collects all uppercase greetings into a single batch file
4. **`cowpy`:** Generates ASCII art using the `cowpy` tool

The workflow configuration supports providing inputs and parameters in a flexible, reproducible way.

### Skills acquired

Through this hands-on course, you've learned how to:

- Describe and utilize core Nextflow components sufficient to build a simple multi-step workflow
- Describe next-step concepts such as operators and channel factories
- Launch a Nextflow workflow locally
- Find and interpret outputs (results) and log files generated by Nextflow
- Troubleshoot basic issues

You're now equipped with the foundational knowledge to start developing your own pipelines in Nextflow.

## Next steps to level up your Nextflow skills

- Apply Nextflow to a scientific analysis use case with [Nextflow for Science](../nf4_science/index.md)
- Get started with nf-core with [Hello nf-core](../../hello_nf-core/index.md)
- Explore more advanced Nextflow features with the [Side Quests](../side_quests/index.md)

Finally, we recommend you have a look at [**Seqera Platform**](https://seqera.io/), a cloud-based platform developed by the creators of Nextflow that makes it even easier to launch and manage your workflows, as well as manage your data and run analyses interactively in any environment.

## Feedback survey

Before you move on, please take a minute to complete the course survey! Your feedback helps us improve our training materials for everyone.

[Take the survey :material-arrow-right:](survey.md){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
