# Course summary

Congratulations on completing the Hello Nextflow training course! 🎉

<div class="video-wrapper">
  <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xHOcx_4Ancg?si=Lp8hS8RdaMwbp5j5&amp;list=PLPZ8WHdZGxmXiHf8B26oB_fTfoKQdhlik" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

/// caption
:fontawesome-brands-youtube:{ .youtube } See the [whole playlist on the Nextflow YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLPZ8WHdZGxmXiHf8B26oB_fTfoKQdhlik).

:green_book: You can read the [video transcript](./transcripts/07_next_steps.md) alongside the video.
///

<!-- TODO: make this a pull-right card? -->

Before you move on, please fill out the very brief feedback survey about your experience taking this training.

[Take the survey :material-arrow-right:](survey.md){ .md-button .md-button--primary }

## Your journey

You started with a very basic workflow that ran a hardcoded command.
Over the course of six parts, you transformed that basic workflow into a modular multi-step pipeline that exercises key features of Nextflow including channels, operators, built-in support for containers, and configuration options.

### What you built

The final form of the Hello workflow takes as input a CSV file containing text greetings.

The four steps are implemented as Nextflow processes (`sayHello`, `convertToUpper`, `collectGreetings`, and `cowpy`) stored in separate module files.

The results are published to a directory called `results/`, and the final output of the pipeline is a plain text file containing ASCII art of a character saying the uppercased greetings.

<figure class="excalidraw">
--8<-- "docs/hello_nextflow/img/hello_pipeline_complete.svg"
</figure>

1. **`sayHello`:** Writes each greeting to its own output file (_e.g._ "Hello-output.txt")
2. **`convertToUpper`:** Converts each greeting to uppercase (_e.g._ "HELLO")
3. **`collectGreetings`:** Collects all uppercase greetings into a single batch file
4. **`cowpy`:** Generates ASCII art using the `cowpy` tool

The workflow configuration supports providing inputs and parameters in a flexible, reproducible way.

### Key skills acquired

Through this hands-on course, you've learned how to:

- Describe and utilize core Nextflow components sufficient to build a simple multi-step workflow
- Describe next-step concepts such as operators and channel factories
- Launch a Nextflow workflow locally
- Find and interpret outputs (results) and log files generated by Nextflow
- Troubleshoot basic issues

You're now equipped with the foundational knowledge to start developing your own pipelines in Nextflow.

## Next steps

### Top 3 ways to level up your Nextflow skills

- Apply Nextflow to a scientific analysis use case

  The **[Nextflow for Science](../nf4_science/index.md)** page lists short standalone courses that demonstrate how to apply the basic concepts and mechanisms presented in Hello Nextflow to common scientific analysis use cases.

- Get started with nf-core

  The **[Hello nf-core](../../hello_nf-core/index.md)** training course will introduce you to the [nf-core](https://nf-co.re/) community-curated pipelines and development framework, designed to help you write reproducible, scalable, and standardized workflows. You’ll learn how to use existing nf-core pipelines, contribute to their development, and even start building your own, supported by best practices and a vibrant community. If you’re keen to apply your Nextflow skills in real-world projects, this is the perfect next step.

- Explore more advanced Nextflow features

  The **[Side Quests](../side_quests/index.md)** are short standalone courses that go deep into specific topics like testing, metadata handling, using conditional statements and the differences between working on HPC _vs._ cloud.

### Check out Seqera Platform

**[Seqera Platform](https://seqera.io/) is the best way to run Nextflow in practice.**

It's a cloud-based platform developed by the creators of Nextflow that you can connect to your own compute infrastructure (whether local, HPC or cloud) to make it much easier to launch and manage your workflows, as well as manage your data and run analyses interactively in a cloud environment.

The Free Tier is available for free use by everyone (with usage quotas).
Qualifying academics can get free Pro-level access (no usage limitations) through the [Academic Program](https://seqera.io/academic/program/).

Have a look at the [Seqera Platform tutorials](https://docs.seqera.io/platform/latest/getting-started/quickstart-demo/comm-showcase) to see if this might be useful to you.

---

Congratulations again on completing this training!
Please take a minute to complete the feedback survey if you haven't already.

[Take the survey :material-arrow-right:](survey.md){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
