---
title: Nextflow Run
hide:
  - toc
---

# Nextflow Run

Hello! You are now on the path to running reproducible and scalable scientific workflows using Nextflow.

The rise of big data has made it increasingly necessary to be able to analyze and perform experiments on large datasets in a portable and reproducible manner. Parallelization and distributed computing are the best ways to tackle this challenge, but the tools commonly available to computational scientists often lack good support for these techniques, or they provide a model that fits poorly with the needs of computational scientists. Nextflow was particularly created to address these challenges.

During this training, you will be introduced to Nextflow through hands-on exercises.

## Audience & prerequisites

This training is intended for learners who are completely new to Nextflow and wish to execute existing pipelines.

**Prerequisites**

- A GitHub account OR a local installation (see [Environment options](../envsetup/index.md)).
- Basic experience with command line.

## Learning objectives

In this workshop, you will learn foundational concepts and skills for configuring and running Nextflow pipelines without treating them like a black box.

By the end of this workshop you will be able to:

- Launch a Nextflow workflow locally
- Find and interpret outputs (results) and log files generated by Nextflow
- Troubleshoot basic issues
- Identify the main components of a Nextflow workflow and explain at a general level how they relate to what the workflow does
- Configure and manage the execution of Nextflow workflows

Ready to take the course?

[Start learning :material-arrow-right:](00_orientation.md){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
